Sula Vineyards (or "Sula") is a winery and vineyard located in the Nashik region of western India,180 km northeast of Mumbai. After the launch of its first wines in 2000, Sula expanded from its original 30 acre family estate in Nashik to approximately 1800 acres across Nashik and the state of Maharashtra.

Sula Vineyards
Sulawines logo.png
Location	Nashik, Maharashtra, India
Founded	1998
First vintage	1999
Key people	Rajeev Samant (CEO & Founder)
Kerry Damskey (Master Winemaker)
Ajoy Shaw (Chief Winemaker)
Chaitanya Rathi (Chief Operating Officer)
Cecilia Oldne (VP International Business)
Varietals	Chenin blanc, Riesling, Sauvignon blanc, Viognier, Cabernet Sauvignon, Malbec, Merlot, Syrah, Zinfandel
Other products	Grape seed oil, Grape brandy
Website	www.sulawines.com
Sula introduced grape varietals such as Chenin blanc, Sauvignon blanc, Riesling and Zinfandel to India and as of 2013, they hold a market share of almost 70% in the Indian wine Industry.


FacilitiesCoordinates: 20°00'24.8?N 73°41'18.5?E
Tours and tastings are conducted seven days a week throughout the year.

Grape stomping: The harvest and crush season runs from January to March and The Grape Stomping activity is conducted in this period.

The restaurants: Little Italy and Soma are the two restaurants here. The Gift Shop, The Bottle Shop which stocks exclusive brands which can be bought only at the winery, The Tasting Room facing the vineyards and backwaters of the Gangapur Dam.

History
Sula Vineyards was founded by Mr. Rajeev Samant in 1998. Samant studied engineering at Stanford University and worked at Oracle in San Francisco thereafter. After quitting his corporate job, Samant established Sula upon his return to India. He initially experimented with crops such as mangoes, roses, teakwood, and table grapes before realising that Nashik's climate and temperature were well-suited for growing wine grapes. In consultation with Kerry Damskey, a Californian winemaker, Samant set up the first winery in the Nashik region of India.

Sula was named after Samant's mother – 'Sulabha'. Samant steadily expanded the company over the next few years by introducing newer grape varieties and expanding the company's offerings. Today, the Nashik region is known as the 'Wine Capital of India' and is home to almost 50 wineries.


View of Sula Vineyards, Nashik
Currently, Sula operates two wineries at Nashik and Dindori in Maharashtra, and have taken over three custom crush facilities in Nashik and Karnataka.

Sula's grapes come from their vineyards as well as from contract farmers across the region. The company's viticulture team trains and educates these farmers on best practices. In 2015, Sula announced a price increase of 10% for its contract farmers in order to support the farmers through unpredictable changes in weather as well as to meet the increasing demand for wine in India.